---
title: Talks Selected for PySangamam 2018
author: PySangamam
layout: blog
permalink: /blog/2018/08/11/announcing-selected-talks/
categories: [Announcement]
tags: [announcement]
date: 2018-08-11
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
active: blog
---

Here's the list of talks we have finalized for the conference.

1. Creating Pluggable Web-based Electronic Medical Records using
  Django and a Rich UI with JS - Challenges
2. Awesome Command Line Tools
3. A Gentle Introduction to Effective Parallelism via Computer Vision
4. Gentle Introduction to GPU Programming using Numba
5. Scaling Python WSGI Servers in Kubernetes
6. Experience with Python type hints
7. Stack frames and Tail call recursion in Python
8. From ELIZA to Sofia
9. A Neural Network that can Read your Handwriting - Implementation
  of Optical Character Recognition using Deep Learning (CNN-N Gram)
10. Experimental Mathematics with Python and Sage
11. Comprehensive Study of Distance Metric Learning in Nearest
    Neighbor Algorithm
12. Building a Psychometric Question Calibration Tool with Python
13. Pandas - Data Transformational Data Structure Patterns and Challenges
14. Generators Explained
15. 3.6 <= Dataclasses >= 3.7
16. TakeNote: A Portable Note Taker for People with Visual Impairment

#### **Talk Details**

Detailed description of the talks, and information about the speakers
are provided below.

<!--more-->

##### **1. Creating Pluggable Web-based Electronic Medical Records using Django and a Rich UI with JS - Challenges**

The author of the talk had been forced to put up with poorly designed EMRs
in both FOSS world and commercial world. In a frustration he had
attempted to start his own project to design an EMR that is both
feature rich and has an easy to use UI that suits the workflow of a
typical doctor.

In most EMRs the doctor has to adapt to the vagaries of the software
designer and redesign his work flow. Most EMRs are linear and assume a
doctor does things in a particular order and designed
based on that. In most cases, however, a doctor differs from this and
has to bend his workflow to suit the EMRs. Since most of these
software are designed for billing/coding purposes the medical
information interface takes a back seat and the experience of using
them is poor.

AuShadha aims to set these straight by putting the doctor, the
clinician, first. AuShadha is aimed at making doctors' workflow easier
and to adapt to each doctor's working pattern and data entry
preferences. AuShadha aims at pluggability so that customisation
should ideally be plug and play using Django's intrinsic capabilities.

Speaker: **Dr. Easwar TR**.

Pediatric Orthopedic & Spine Surgeon, FOSS enthusiast, self taught
Python / Javascript developer Dr Easwar is a self taught developer and
started developing web-applications in 2008. His quest was to develop
a usable FOSS based Electronic Medical Records application. After
several iterations of developing the EMR and correcting several
beginner errors, he eventually settled to develop an EMR that would be
usable across specialities and would cater to a small clinic. He has
christened it as [AuShadha](https://github.com/dreaswar/AuShadha) He
writes at [https://dreaswar.com](https://dreaswar.com)


##### **2. Awesome Command Line Tools**

Designing a good command line tool is challenging. Command line tools
look archaic compared to modern graphical interfaces, discoverability
is a big issue for command line tools, proactive help is hard to
implement. This talk will cover a set of specific techniques to help
alleviate those challenges.

How did pgcli and mycli overcome these problems? We will cover
specific examples where command line apps shine. The examples will be
drawn from pgcli, mycli and bpython. This talk will suggest libraries
and show how they can help you implement a wonderful command line
interface.

The libraries covered in this talk include python-prompt-toolkit,
pygments, click, fuzzyfind. The goal of the talk is to distill the
ideas that exist in successful command line applications as guidelines
for building powerful command line applications.

Speaker: **Amjith Ramanujam**

Amjith Ramanujam is a senior software engineer at Netflix. His team is
responsible of regional failover. In his spare time, he writes modern
CLI tools. He is the creator of the dbcli org which is a collection of
modern command line tools that are built to be user-friendly and
powerful. The dbcli org boast such tools as pgcli, mycli and
mssql-cli.

##### **3. A Gentle Introduction to Effective Parallelism via Computer Vision**

At this talk, we will look at what it takes process videos in Python
as efficiently as `FFmpeg`. It will cover -

  * Quick basics of computer vision - How images and videos are stored
    and managed, and how to handle videos in python using FFmpeg and
    OpenCV, an open source computer vision library
  * Simple parallelism in Python making use of the `multiprocessing`
    module, and how it extends to CV (Computer Vision)
  * Piping in Python
  * Using piping and multiprocessing to smartly speed up your video
    processing

Speaker: **R S Nikhil Krishna**

Nikhil is a final year student at IIT Madras. He currently leads the
Computer Vision and AI team at Detect Technologies and has headed the
CVI group at CFI, IIT Madras in the past. In the past, He has worked
on semi-autonomous tumour detection for automated brain surgery at the
Division of Remote Handling and Robotics, BARC and on importance
sampling for accelerated gradient optimization methods applied to Deep
Learning at EPFL, Switzerland.

As the head of the [The Computer Vision and Intelligence
Group](http://iitmcvg.github.io/) at CFI, IIT Madras, he has taken
sessions to initiate hundreds of college students to Python, Computer
Vision and AI, openly accessible at their [github
repo](https://github.com/iitmcvg/Content)

##### **4. Gentle Introduction to GPU Programming using Numba**

**Heterogeneous or Hybrid computing** is about using the best
processor for the job, combining the CPU and the GPU for high-powered
computing. The conventional idea that computers will double in speed
about every two years is no longer true. Computers are getting wider,
not faster. In this presentation, we will cover the basic GPU
architecture and a very gentle introduction to **Numba** which lets
you access Nvidia GPUs from python.

Speaker: **Lokesh Kumar T**

A 3rd-year student, electrical engineering, IIT Madras. Heads the CVI
group, CFI along with Varun Sundar. Currently working on Computer
Vision, Deep Learning, and Language Analysis all using Python
tools. In DeTect technologies, worked in automating the chimney and
stack inspections using both traditional and Deep methods of Vision,
also On-Board vision-based processing on drones.

##### **5. Scaling Python WSGI Servers in Kubernetes**

This is about our experience with building+moving and scaling most
parts of our monolithic application to microservices. The choice for
deployment is Kubernetes. Most of our business components run in
Python WSGI servers.

Speaker: **Arunkumar Krishnan**

  * Work: Deal with data processing systems + AI related stuff @
    OrangeScape Technologies.
  * Interest: Research on Digital Data preservation.

##### **6. Experience with Python type hints**

Python 3.5 RC introduced type hints in the standard library, since
then a lot of projects use Python hints in the code. For past one
year, at work, I have been using Python type hints in the data
pipelines and neural networks. The talk is based on the experience.

Speaker: **Kracekumar**

Kracekumar's work as a software engineer has been around building web
applications, data pipelines, and automating servers. Currently, he
works at minds.ai. He has also conducted workshops in Bangalore Python
user group meetups, PyCon India, PyCon Singapore etc

  * FOSS contributions: [https://github.com/kracekumar/](https://github.com/kracekumar/)
  * Tech Blog: [http://kracekumar.com](http://kracekumar.com)

##### **7. Stack frames and Tail call recursion in Python**

We know that we should avoid recursions wherever possible and that too
much recursion is injurious to our codebase. But why is it so? How
does compiler works behind the scenes that makes us say that? What if
using recursion is the only way to solve the problem? How do we deal
in a situation like that? Do we make a trade-off? How do we know our
recursive function will be able to run on CPUs across the globe and
not cause a stack overflow in a low end CPU?

In this talk, I'll explain the working of recursion behind the scenes,
how compiler treats a recursive function and what causes the infamous
`maximum recursion depth exceeded error`. Furthermore I'll take a deep
dive explaining Memoization in Python and how it can help in letting
your CPU breathe by decreasing time and memory usage. Lastly I'll
explain about about Tail call recursion in Python; how it works, what
is the difference between normal Tail call and Python Tail call and
what happens behind the scenes when we use it.

Speaker: **Varun Dey**

Associate Software Engineer at Symantec Corporation working on
building Norton Identity Safe. Have been working with Python since
last three years to allow himself to be lazy by automating most of the
stuff around him. However spends most of his time looking, debugging
and writing Javascript at work. Believes in open source and loves
developing good-quality software products.

##### **8. From ELIZA to Sofia**

Participants will be able to appreciate the power and scope of
affective computing. I will walk them through the model which detects
emotions in real time. After the talk, the audience will have a deep
understanding on what, how to build a CNN algorithm and implement the
state of the art detection of emotion using facial recognition. I will
also explain them the architecture of a CNN and walk them through
libraries like keras to give them an insight of the power of the
same. They will learn about various ways to increase the accuracy of a
model using data augmentation and hyper-parameter tuning. The
application will be used to detect emotions from the images at first
and in addition to that the emotion will be detected from a video in
real-time too.

Speaker: **Rohan Banerjee**

Rohan is currently pursuing his undergrad degree in computer science
at SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai. He's member of
the QS award winning Next Tech Lab at SRM, where he works on the
cutting edge of various fields such as Computer Vision and IoT. He
likes learning from online courses, having already completed CS231N,
Deep Learning on Udacity, and currently pursuing the deeplearning.ai
specialisation course. During his recent internship at a startup where
he worked with the founder on building their Emotional AI platform, he
used Python extensively for web scraping and scripting. He also has
experience in using Python with Raspberry Pi. When he's not coding, he
likes photography and cooking.

##### **9. A Neural Network that can Read your Handwriting - Implementation of Optical Character Recognition using Deep Learning (CNN-N Gram)**

Optical Character Recognition is an upcoming field and is much
fascination among deep learning researchers. OCR is the conversion of
typed or handwritten text into machine-encoded text. It is one of the
hardest problems to solve in computer vision and is still an active
area of research with no one standard model.

CNN-RNN architectures in Deep Learning provide a far lower accuracy
for predicting such text. I propose a method by combining CNN-NGram
and Image Augmentation for recognizing handwritten text. Furthermore,
there would be an explanation of how to approach such machine learning
problems, i.e from the data collection to pre-processing to the model
training and results

Speaker: **Archana Iyer**

Is the co-founder of Next Tech Lab at SRM Institute of Science and
Technology. Her achievements include [winning the Smart India
Hackathon
2017](https://www.business-standard.com/article/news-ani/next-tech-lab-from-srm-university-dominates-smart-india-hackathon-2017-117040400729_1.html)
as the first prize under Ministry of Steel for using machine learning
to detect power theft in India. Archana was also invited to the
[WiPDA](http://www.wipda-asia.org/) conference in Xi'an China for
presenting my work in GaN modeling of devices using machine learning,
a collaboration with the University of Cambridge. She has around 3
IEEE Xplore Papers [(1)](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8293259/),
[(2)](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7977665/), and [1
Elsevier](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876610217324645)
papers for her contribution to the Electrical and Machine learning
fields.

##### **10. Experimental Mathematics with Python and Sage**

Showcases the use of Sage, a Python based, open-source mathematical
software used to explore the world of Mathematics. The aim is to
deepen the engagement between programmers and mathematics. The talk
will outline how Sage is ideal tool for mathematical exploration and
why the speaker chose Sage. It will also discuss some success stories
where Sage was used in some high impact publications.

Speaker: **Prof. Amritanshu Prasad**

Amritanshu Prasad is a Professor of Mathematics at The Institute of
Mathematical Sciences, Chennai. His research interests include
Representation Theory (the mathematical theory of symmetry) and
combinatorics (the mathematics of finite structures). He uses python
and Sage to explore these worlds experimentally, and for teaching
mathematics.

Website: [http://www.imsc.res.in/~amri](http://www.imsc.res.in/~amri)

##### **11. Comprehensive Study of Distance Metric Learning in Nearest Neighbor Algorithm**

The aim of this talk is to familiarise the audience with multiple
components of the Nearest Neighbour Algorithm and its applications.

Nearest Neighbour(NN) algorithm, which is a lazy and a non-parametric
method used for classification is one of the most intuitive and widely
used machine learning algorithms. It is most often sought by business
consultants for its simple and easy to understand framework. The
performance of the algorithm can be enhanced by optimally tuning its
hyper-parameters, which includes the k-value and the distance
metric. However, practitioners tend to focus only on optimising k and
ignores the other. The very term "nearest-neighbour" means that we
employ some notion of near, i.e. we use some distance metric to
quantify similarity and thus define neighbours. This emphasises the
importance of the Distance Metric in the NN algorithm.

In this talk, we present some of the novel approaches used, to learn
the distance metric from the training data. Also, we demonstrate how
slight amendments to the approach can lead to an inception of a
dimensionality reduction technique. The above mentioned approaches are
bundled together as a python package and is showcased to the audience.

Speaker: **Kousik Krishnan**

Kousik is pursuing his undergraduate studies at Chennai Mathematical
Institute and shows immense interest in Machine Learning and
Finance. He has contributed to multiple open source projects and has
interned with the research and development teams of various
organisations. His primary research interests include computer vision,
graph based machine learning algorithms and quantitative finance. He
has also involved in different technical talks at IIT-M and is a
member of the Chennai Python Meetup group


##### **12. Building a Psychometric Question Calibration Tool with Python**

The talk aims to discuss about item calibration and ability
estimation, a major interest of GRE, GMAT test makers and other
educational institutions in the recent days. Attendees will get a
glimpse of the so called Psychometric research and learn how python
can befriend data analytics and statistics.

Most people think writing test is a stressful and arduous task. But
framing a standardised test to evaluate someone's ability is no less
challenging. Especially, making targeted questions for users at
different level is difficult. In such a test, accurately rating a
question level is vital for good performance analysis.

This talk will describe the implementation of a Question Calibration
and Question Level Estimation tool with Python, with emphasis on the
challenges in data collection, data analysis and arriving at the
algorithm. The talk will also exemplify its usage in a commercial
e-learning application (STEP - Standardised Test for English
Proficiency) while describing the calibration results and the impact
of calibration on the test.

Speaker: **Sakthi Priya Amirtharaj**

Sakthi Priya is a B.Tech graduate in Engineering physics from IIT
Madras. She joined STEP (from The Hindu Group Publishing Pvt. Ltd.) in
2017 as Product Engineer where she contributes for the back-end and
front-end development of the web application, mainly using Python. She
is also responsible for analysing the key products in STEP and
building engines to boost up user engagement. Her major interests are
in Machine learning and Teaching. She has addressed students in
schools and NGOs as a part of her NSS project in IITM.


##### **13. Pandas - Data Transformational Data Structure Patterns and Challenges**

This talk is about the speakers work on using Pandas data structures
for reporting and analytical needs. It intends to cover the advantages
and design patterns associated with such modelling, and the challenges
thrown by databases and other storage/sql/nosql based systems. It also
contemplates finally on what’s in store for future of such libraries.

Speaker: **M. Rajesh**

Rajesh is a Enterprise Architect with eighteen years of experience in
architecting business systems. He currently heads the engineering
division of OrangeScape Technologies, a renowned SAAS Platform. He
began his career in technology as a developer of enterprise servers
and then moved to SOA and now to SAAS based complex data processing
systems. Rajesh, a Statistics and Computer Applications graduate is
interested in learning statistics and mathematical problems whenever
he gets a chance to. An avid reader of literature, systems thinking
and artificial intelligence books.  He frequently posts in his
linkedin
blog. [https://www.linkedin.com/in/rajeshmds/](https://www.linkedin.com/in/rajeshmds/)

##### **14. Generators Explained**

This talk aims to provide a conceptual understanding of how Python
generators work, and how to use them to make your code more efficient
and sleek. It intends to cover things like iteration using generators,
infinite series, generator expressions, stacking generators and the
`yield from`. And will finally go into how it is used in practice for
data loading in machine learning.

Speaker: **Rajat Vadiraj Dwaraknath**

Rajat is a 3rd year student at IIT Madras studying Electrical
Engineering. As a council Member of the IIT Madras Computer Vision and
Intelligence group, he has given numerous sessions on various topics
in the field of deep learning and computer vision. He has also worked
on personal projects in the field using popular frameworks like
Tensorflow, Keras and Pytorch.

##### **15. 3.6 <= Dataclasses >= 3.7**

Data storage classes and checks and balances around them are an
essential aspect of a non-Dataframe related application. Possible type
checks, lightweightedness, minimal memory footprint, quick
serialization and reference data enrichment have been some of the most
important aspects of these pure data bearing classes.

This talks will try to cover the following aspects -

* The challenges associated with using pure data bearers, and how did
  we tackled these in v3.6
* Introduction to named tuples and data classes
* Data classes (v3.7) demystified

Speaker: **Ramanathan Ramakrishnamoorthy**

Ramanathan is a data science and machine learning enthusiast. He is
the co-founder of Zentropy Pvt Ltd that primarily works with end to
end implementations of FinTech solutions for capital markets and
data-science based projects. He has close to 11 years of industry
experience and have been working in Python for more than 4 years. He
is also a core team member of the Hyderabad Python community.

##### **16. TakeNote: A Portable Note Taker for People with Visual Impairment**

Take Note is a wireless braille note taker. The device houses a ESP32
based nodeMCU, and has 9 buttons and a slider switch. The buttons are
used to type in Braille code and the slider switch is used to power
the device on or switch off the device. The data typed using these
buttons is stored in a SD card present in the device. Hence the users
can take this portable device in a classroom and take notes.

The device provides an audio feedback by transferring the message on
to the connected computer or mobile device via bluetooth and running a
script to convert the received text into speech. The software further
provides the user a chance to read a file out loud.

This talk aims to give the audience an approach on incorporating
Python to write the software for an embedded device. The talk also
focuses on disability and discusses on what can be done to improve the
lives of people with disability using technology. It also highlights
the knack of designing softwares which are accessible.

Speaker: **Kashyap Ravichandran**

Kashyap Ravichandran is currently pursuing his Bachelors in
Electronics and Communication engineering from SSN College of
Engineering, Kalavakkam, Chennai. The speaker, was admitted for a
summer internship into IIT madras for a period of 2 months and he
worked under Dr. Anil Prabhakar, Professor, Department of Electrical
Sciences. He assisted in the development of Take Note during this
period. The speaker so far has worked exclusive on hardware projects
and this is his first foray in the domain of software.
